W-17117213-OTEL-48-dm (#2849)
mulesoft/docs-mule-runtime-3: modules/ROOT/pages/otel-support.adoc

> = OpenTelemetry support in Mule runtime

Author: ```suggestion
= OpenTelemetry Support in Mule Runtime
```

ifndef::env-site,env-github[]
include::_attributes.adoc[]
endif::[]
:page-aliases: otel, otel support, OpenTelemetry

> OpenTelemetry is an observability standard consisting of APIs and SDKs. It helps instrument, generate, collect, and export telemetry data, such as metrics, logs, and traces, to analyze software performance and behavior. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenTelemetry is an observability standard consisting of Specifications, APIs, and SDKs. It helps instrument, generate, collect, and export telemetry data, such as metrics, logs, and traces, to analyze software behavior. 
```

OpenTelemetry enables Mule runtime to provide observability into the behavior of Mule apps. With distributed tracing, Mule runtime also brings observability to the interactions between different Mule apps and non-Mule components when the latter leverages this standard.

> Starting in Mule 4.5, Mule runtime supports generating and exporting OpenTelemetry distributed traces. However, metrics and logs aren't yet supported through OpenTelemetry.

Reviewer: I think you said that it was 4.6 and this says 4.5 (just in case comment). Moreover, we no longer support 4.5 so I think we should say 4.6 in all places.

> Starting in Mule 4.5, Mule runtime supports generating and exporting OpenTelemetry distributed traces. However, metrics and logs aren't yet supported through OpenTelemetry.

Author: ```suggestion
Mule runtime supports generating and exporting OpenTelemetry distributed traces. However, metrics and logs aren't yet supported through OpenTelemetry.
```

== Before You Begin

> To use OpenTelemetry, you must be familiar with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use the OpenTelemetry Mule features, you must be familiar with:
```

> * Distributed tracing concepts, such as traces and spans. If you are just getting started with distributed tracing and OpenTelemetry, we suggest you read https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/what-is-opentelemetry/[What is OpenTelemetry] and https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/observability-primer/#understanding-distributed-tracing[Understanding distributed tracing].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Distributed tracing concepts, such as traces and spans. If you're new to distributed tracing and OpenTelemetry, we recommend starting with https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/what-is-opentelemetry/[What is OpenTelemetry] and https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/observability-primer/#understanding-distributed-tracing[Understanding distributed tracing].
```

Before starting with the observability standard, ensure that you have:

> * For flow tracing, at least Mule runtime 4.5.0.

Reviewer: I don't think that we should talk about this requirements here. This should be part of the anypoint monitoring documentation about OTEL Tracing that, by the way, I cannot find. Where is it? We should instead say that the client must be familiarized with that documentation.

Reviewer 3: Hi, this is my mistake. Every mention to 4.5.0 has to be removed.

> * For flow tracing, at least Mule runtime 4.5.0.

Author: ```suggestion
* For flow tracing, at least Mule runtime 4.6.0.
```

> * For distributed tracing, at least Mule runtime 4.5.0, HTTP connector 1.8, and the span exporter configured.

Author: ```suggestion
* For distributed tracing, at least Mule runtime 4.6.0, HTTP connector 1.8, and the span exporter configured.
```

== Tracing Mule App

Mule runtime leverages OpenTelemetry to provide:

> * Data about app execution 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* App execution observability 
```

Following this, the trace displays the other two batch steps, along with their respective components.
Finally, the Batch On Complete span is shown, along with the Logger component that appears after the Batch Job in the flow. 

=== Example of Distributed Tracing Feature

Consider two Mule apps where the first sends a request to the second.

image::otel-mule-app1.png["A flow including a Listener, Logger, and Request components of an HTTP app"]

image::otel-mule-app2.png["A flow showing the process flow for an asynchronous application"]

Even though these are two different flows, distributed tracing captures both as part of the same trace because OpenTelemetry is instrumentation in Mule runtime and HTTP Connector.

=== Errors in Tracing

If the execution of the unit of work represented by a span produces an error, the span's status is set to `Error`. MuleSoft follows the semantic convention defined by OpenTelemetry that adds one or more `exception` events to the span:

* `exception.type`: Mule error type
* `exception.message`: Mule error message

> * `exception.stacktrace`: Mule flow stack string representation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `exception.stacktrace`: Mule flow stack trace string representation
```

Reviewer 3: No, this should't  be trace. It is the flow stack from the mule (called "Flow stack"). It's important not to put stacktrace because it is not the java stacktrace (it's something mule related). And actually when developing this it was a design decision not to put a stracktrace and some customers would like to have a stacktrace there :) (that was even the original proposal)

=== HTTP Conventions

The HTTP Listener and the HTTP Request operations contribute additional attributes to the spans, providing more context for tracing the HTTP interactions.

For flows with an HTTP Listener:

* Span name: Combination of HTTP Method and path. For example, `POST /api`.
* Span kind: `SERVER`.

Additional attributes for an HTTP Listener associated flow span:

[%header%autowidth.spread]
|===
| Attribute | Description 
| `net.host.name` | The host address of the HTTP Listener
| `net.host.port` | The port of the HTTP Listener
| `http.user_agent` | The user agent of the received request
| `http.route` | The path of the listener
| `http.method` | the HTTP Method
| `http.flavor` | the HTTP version
|===

For flows with an HTTP Request: 

* Span name: HTTP Method. For example, `GET`
* Span kind: `CLIENT`

Additional attributes for an HTTP Request associated flow span:

[%header%autowidth.spread]
|===
| Attribute | Description 
| `http.url` | The target URL
| `net.host.port` | The port of the HTTP Request
| `net.peer.name` | The target IP address
| `http.route` | The path of the HTTP Request
| `http.flavor` | the HTTP Version
|===

== See Also

> * xref:monitoring::telemetry-exporter.adoc[Export Telemetry Data to Third-Party Monitoring Systems]

Reviewer: This should link to the main section of the Anypoint Monitoring documentation, not just how to configure the exporter. Our job here is to explain how the flow and the distributed tracing works taking into account Mule specifics.

= OpenTelemetry Support in Mule Runtime
ifndef::env-site,env-github[]
include::_attributes.adoc[]
endif::[]
:page-aliases: otel, otel support, OpenTelemetry

> OpenTelemetry is an observability standard consisting of Specifications, APIs, and SDKs. It helps instrument, generate, collect, and export telemetry data, such as metrics, logs, and traces, to analyze software behavior. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
OpenTelemetry is an observability standard consisting of specifications, APIs, and SDKs. It helps instrument, generate, collect, and export telemetry data, such as metrics, logs, and traces, to analyze software behavior. 
```

Reviewer 4: Does it help "you" (or developers or apps) instrument, generate, etc?

> OpenTelemetry enables Mule runtime to provide observability into the behavior of Mule apps. With distributed tracing, Mule runtime also brings observability to the interactions between different Mule apps and non-Mule components when the latter leverages this standard.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
OpenTelemetry enables Mule runtime to provide observability into the behavior of Mule apps. With distributed tracing, Mule runtime also brings observability to interactions between Mule apps and non-Mule components that leverage this standard.
```

> OpenTelemetry enables Mule runtime to provide observability into the behavior of Mule apps. With distributed tracing, Mule runtime also brings observability to the interactions between different Mule apps and non-Mule components when the latter leverages this standard.

Reviewer 4: I think you can say "Mule runtime engine" for the first mention and then just use "Mule" for subsequent references.

> Mule runtime supports generating and exporting OpenTelemetry distributed traces. However, metrics and logs aren't yet supported through OpenTelemetry.

Reviewer 4: Should this appear after the first sentence?

== Before You Begin

To use the OpenTelemetry Mule features, you must be familiar with:

> * Distributed tracing concepts, including traces and spans. If you're new to distributed tracing and OpenTelemetry, we recommend starting with https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/what-is-opentelemetry/[What is OpenTelemetry] and https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/observability-primer/#understanding-distributed-tracing[Understanding distributed tracing].

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Distributed tracing concepts, including traces and spans.
+
If you're new to distributed tracing and OpenTelemetry, we recommend starting with https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/what-is-opentelemetry/[What is OpenTelemetry] and https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/observability-primer/#understanding-distributed-tracing[Understanding distributed tracing].
```

* xref:monitoring::telemetry-exporter.adoc[How to export telemetry data to third-party monitoring systems].

> Before starting with the observability standard, ensure that you have:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Before starting with the observability standard, you must have:
```

> * For flow tracing, at least Mule runtime 4.6.0.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* For flow tracing, Mule runtime 4.6.0 or later.
```

> * For distributed tracing, HTTP connector 1.8, and the span exporter configured.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* For distributed tracing, HTTP Connector 1.8 with the span exporter configured.
```

Reviewer 4: Full name for the HTTP Connector?

Is span exporter part of HTTP Connector?

> == Tracing Mule App

Reviewer 4: Should this be "Mule Tracing App"? Is the app a tracing app? Or are you tracing the Mule app?

Mule runtime leverages OpenTelemetry to provide:

* App execution observability 
+

> This includes how each component of the app behaves. The main span involved in a Mule app is the flow span. Each Mule component execution taking part in the message processing is represented as a child span of the corresponding flow.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Observability includes how each component of the app behaves. The main span involved in a Mule app is the flow span. Each Mule component execution involved in the message processing is represented as a child span of the corresponding flow.
```

* Distributed tracing
+

> This enables you to track Mule app interactions. When multiple systems and services are involved, distributed tracing tracks app requests as they flow through distributed environments providing a comprehensive view of the app's execution.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Tracing enables you to track Mule app interactions. When multiple systems and services are involved, distributed tracing tracks app requests as they flow through distributed environments, providing a comprehensive view of the app's execution.
```

> For example, if an HTTP Listener receives https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/[W3C Trace Context] headers, the flow span in Mule acquires the client's remote parent span, the span where the HTTP call originated. Mule automatically propagates the current span to the server endpoints when using the HTTP Requester component. 

Reviewer 4: Is Listener usually init cap?

The span context format supported for receiving and propagating the context is the https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/[W3C Trace Context] format.

=== Mule Span Data

> Traces are a sequence of spans representing a complete operation in a distributed system. Spans can be nested and represent a unit of work or operation. Each span includes: 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A trace is a sequence of spans representing a complete operation in a distributed system. Spans can be nested and represent a unit of work or operation. Each span includes: 
```

Reviewer 4: (subject-verb agreement)

[%header%autowidth.spread,cols="a,a,a"]
|===
| Categories | Description | Possible Values

> | Name | Name of the span | “mule:set-variable”

Reviewer 4: Should the value be in mono font instead of ""?

Reviewer 4: Is Possible Values actually "Example Values"?

| Parent Span ID | Span ID of current span's parent | “86838830d494d679”
| Start and End Timestamps | Earliest and latest timestamp for a span | "2021-10-22 16:04:01.209458162 +0000 UTC"

> | Span Context | Contains data that uniquely identifies the span: trace ID, span ID, trace flags, trace state | 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| Span Context | Data that uniquely identifies the span: trace ID, span ID, trace flags, and trace state | 
```

Reviewer 4: (to be parallel with other (noun) items in the column)

> | Attributes | Key-value pairs containing metadata used to annotate a span to carry information about the operation it's tracking. | {

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| Attributes | Key-value pairs containing metadata used to annotate a span to carry information about the operation it's tracking | {
```

Reviewer 4: Should tracking be tracing?

“location”: “flow/processors/2”,
“correlation.id”:  “1234abcd”
}

> | Span Events | A structured log message or annotation on a span, used to denote a meaningful, singular point in time during the span's duration. | {

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| Span Events | A structured log message or annotation on a span, used to denote a meaningful, unique point in time during the span's duration | {
```

Reviewer 4: Oh, ignore the period removal. I see that you have a full sentence later in the table.

      "name": "",
      "message": "OK",
      "timestamp": "2021-10-22 16:04:01.209512872 +0000 UTC"
    }
| Span Links | Links that associate one span with one or more spans, indicating a causal relationship. | 

> | Span Status | Status attached to a span. You can set a span status when there is a known error in the app code, such as an exception. | “ERROR”, “OK”, “UNSET”

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| Span Status | Status attached to a span. You can set a span status when a known error, such as an exception, occurs in the app code. | “ERROR”, “OK”, “UNSET”
```

> | Span Kind | Provides information about how the trace is assembled. | “CLIENT”, “INTERNAL”, “PRODUCER”

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| Span Kind | Information about how the trace is assembled. | “CLIENT”, “INTERNAL”, “PRODUCER”
```

|===

=== Example of Flow Tracing Feature

> When tracing a flow execution, each Mule component execution involved in processing the message is represented as spans. The component spans describe the relevant aspects of the execution, which can range from a single span for simple components, such as the Set Payload, to more complex structures, such as a Batch Job.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When tracing a flow execution, each Mule component execution involved in processing the message is represented as a span. The component spans describe the relevant aspects of the execution. They can range from a single span for a simple component, such as the Set Payload, to more complex structures, such as a Batch Job.
```

Reviewer 4: Should Batch Job be lowercase?

.Batch Instance 

> Text

Author: ```suggestion
The Mule runtime traces complex components, such as Batch Jobs.
```
We need to add at least a short intro here to have a symmetry with "spans generated".

Reviewer 3: "The mule runtime will also trace complex components like Batch Jobs. Suppose we have the following flow:"

> image::otel-batch-instance.png["A batch flow including a Listener and Set Payload components, and a more complex structure"]

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
image::otel-batch-instance.png["A batch flow including Listener and Set Payload components, and a more complex structure"]
```

Reviewer 4: Nice alt text!

.Spans Generated

> Each batch record processed by the first step of the Batch Job is shown in the trace with each record span containing a child span representing the unit of work done by the Logger component.

Reviewer 4: Any way to make active voice?

Reviewer 4: Is this describing the flow in the image? If so, can you use callouts and a [calloutlist]?

Reviewer 4: [calloutlist]
. The trace shows each Batch Job processing the batch records. Each record span contains a child span representing the unit of work done by the Logger component.

Reviewer 4: (Not sure if that changes the meaning/makes incorrect.)

Then, the Batch Aggregator span is shown, along with the For Each and the processors executed within it, such as the Transform Message and the Logger. 
Following this, the trace displays the other two batch steps, along with their respective components.
Finally, the Batch On Complete span is shown, along with the Logger component that appears after the Batch Job in the flow. 

=== Example of Distributed Tracing Feature

> Consider two Mule apps where the first sends a request to the second.

Reviewer 4: [where](https://confluence.internal.salesforce.com/pages/viewpage.action?spaceKey=MTDT&title=MuleSoft+CX+Writing+Style+Reference#:~:text=Never%20use%20%22where%22%20when%20referring%20to%20situations%3A)

Reviewer 4: In this example, one Mule app sends a request to another Mule app:

image::otel-mule-app1.png["A flow including a Listener, Logger, and Request components of an HTTP app"]

image::otel-mule-app2.png["A flow showing the process flow for an asynchronous application"]

> Even though these are two different flows, distributed tracing captures both as part of the same trace because OpenTelemetry is instrumentation in Mule runtime and HTTP Connector.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Distributed tracing captures both flows as part of the same trace because OpenTelemetry is instrumented in Mule and HTTP Connector.
```

=== Errors in Tracing

If the execution of the unit of work represented by a span produces an error, the span's status is set to `Error`. MuleSoft follows the semantic convention defined by OpenTelemetry that adds one or more `exception` events to the span:

* `exception.type`: Mule error type
* `exception.message`: Mule error message
* `exception.stacktrace`: Mule flow stack string representation

> In the following example, when an error is produced, the span corresponding to the Raise Error component shows an error status in the Lightstep platform. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In this example, when an error is produced, the span corresponding to the Raise Error component shows an error status in the Lightstep platform:
```

image::otel-errors-in-tracing.png["A flow of a telemetry flow with error handling"]

> This status is propagated to the parent span, for example, the flow span. A detailed view of the span shows the error status and the exception events.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This status propagates to the parent span, for example, the flow span. A detailed view of the span shows the error status and the exception events.
```

=== HTTP Conventions

> The HTTP Listener and the HTTP Request operations contribute additional attributes to the spans, providing more context for tracing the HTTP interactions.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The HTTP Listener and HTTP Request operations contribute additional attributes to the spans, providing more context for tracing the HTTP interactions.
```

For flows with an HTTP Listener:

* Span name: Combination of HTTP Method and path. For example, `POST /api`.
* Span kind: `SERVER`.

Additional attributes for an HTTP Listener associated flow span:

[%header%autowidth.spread]
|===
| Attribute | Description 

> | `net.host.name` | The host address of the HTTP Listener

Reviewer 4: You can remove the article from the start of all these descriptions (streamline for easier scanning).

> | `net.host.name` | The host address of the HTTP Listener

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| `net.host.name` | Host address of the HTTP Listener
```

| `net.host.port` | The port of the HTTP Listener
| `http.user_agent` | The user agent of the received request
| `http.route` | The path of the listener

> | `http.method` | the HTTP Method

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| `http.method` | HTTP method
```

Reviewer 4: Should method be init cap?

| `http.flavor` | the HTTP version
|===

For flows with an HTTP Request: 

* Span name: HTTP Method. For example, `GET`.
* Span kind: `CLIENT`.

Additional attributes for an HTTP Request associated flow span:

[%header%autowidth.spread]
|===
| Attribute | Description 

> | `http.url` | The target URL

Reviewer 4: Same comment as line 118

| `net.host.port` | The port of the HTTP Request
| `net.peer.name` | The target IP address
| `http.route` | The path of the HTTP Request
| `http.flavor` | the HTTP Version
|===

== See Also

> * xref:monitoring::telemetry-exporter.adoc[Export Telemetry Data to Third-Party Monitoring Systems]

Reviewer 4: Do you need the hard-coded link text (i.e., does it need to be different than the H1)? If not, let antora fill it in automagically.
